---
title: CAR Part 106 - Hang Gliders Operating Rules
source_url: https://www.aviation.govt.nz/assets/rules/consolidations/Part_106_Consolidation.pdf
pages: 8
generated_at: 2025-08-09T00:32:43.188Z
---
# Hang Gliders Operating Rules

Published by the Civil Aviation Authority of New Zealand  Part 106  Hang Gliders - Operating Rules  5 April 2025  CAA Consolidation

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  This   document   is   the   current   consolidated   version   of   Part   106 produced by the Civil Aviation Authority, and serves as a reference only.   It is compiled from the rules that have been signed into law by the Minister of Transport.   Copies of the rules as signed by the Minister of Transport may be obtained from the Civil Aviation Authority or may be downloaded from the official web site at: www.caa.govt.nz  5 April 2025   2   CAA of NZ  Rule Objective  The objective of Part 106 is to maintain a safe operating environment for hang gliders.  Part 106 prescribes rules which are additional to, or exceptions from, Part 91, for the operation of hang gliders.

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   3   CAA of NZ  Bulletin  This Part first came into force on 5 April 2025.

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   4   CAA of NZ  List of Rules  Subpart A — General .......................................................................................................   5  106.1   Applicability   ............................................................................................................ 5  106.3   Definitions   ............................................................................................................... 5  106.5   Pilot requirements   .................................................................................................... 5  106.7   Aircraft Airworthiness   ............................................................................................. 5  106.9   Registration   .............................................................................................................. 6  106.11   Aircraft documents ................................................................................................... 6  106.13   Fuel requirements ..................................................................................................... 6  106.15   Aircraft equipment   ................................................................................................... 6  106.17   Aircraft maintenance   ................................................................................................ 6  106.19   Safety equipment   ..................................................................................................... 7  Subpart B — Flight Rules   ...............................................................................................   7  106.51   Right-of-way rules   ................................................................................................... 7  106.53   Clearance below cloud   ............................................................................................. 7  106.55   Minimum altitude ..................................................................................................... 7  106.57   Conditions for flight   ................................................................................................. 8  106.59   Launch sites   ............................................................................................................. 8  106.61   Cruising levels   ......................................................................................................... 8  106.63   Aerobatic flight   ........................................................................................................ 8  106.65   Callsigns   .................................................................................................................. 8  106.67   Towing a Hang Glider in flight   ................................................................................ 8

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   5   CAA of NZ  Subpart A — General  106.1   Applicability  This Part prescribes—  (1)   rules, additional to Part 91, for the operation of hang gliders; and  (2)   exceptions from Part 91, for the operation of hang gliders.  106.3   Definitions  In this Part—  Certificate , in relation to a personnel qualification required by this Part, means a certificate or rating issued by the holder of a delegation from the Director for that purpose.  106.5   Pilot requirements  (a)   A pilot of a hang glider must—  (1)   be a bona fide member of a hang gliding organisation; and  (2)   hold an appropriate hang glider pilot certificate; and  (3)   comply with the privileges and limitations of their pilot certificate and any applicable ratings; and  (4)   comply with the operational standards and procedures of the hang gliding organisation.  (b)   Despite paragraph (a)(2), a person who does not hold an appropriate hang glider pilot certificate may operate a hang glider under the direct supervision of the holder of a hang glider instructor   certificate   issued   by   a   hang   gliding   organisation referred to in paragraph (a)(1).  106.7   Aircraft Airworthiness  The requirements of rule 91.101(a)(1)(i) do not apply to a person who operates a hang glider.

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   6   CAA of NZ  106.9   Registration  (a)   The requirements of rule 91.107 do not apply to a person operating a hang glider.  (b)   A pilot must not operate a hang glider unless they are—  (1)   registered   by   a   hang   gliding   organisation   in accordance with the procedures authorised by their aviation recreation organisation certificate; and  (2)   identified,   in   accordance   with   the   procedures authorised   by   the   hang   gliding   organisation’s aviation recreation organisation certificate, by—  (i)   a hang glider identification mark; or  (ii)   a pilot identification number.  106.11   Aircraft documents  The requirements of rules 91.109 and 91.111 do not apply to a person flying a hang glider.  106.13   Fuel requirements  The requirements of rule 91.305 do not apply to a person flying a hang glider.  106.15   Aircraft equipment  (a)   The requirements of Part 91, Subpart F do not apply to a person operating a hang glider.  (b)   Each person operating a hang glider must be equipped with an altimeter that shows height above the ground to an accuracy of 100 feet.  106.17   Aircraft maintenance  (a)   The requirements of Part 91, Subpart G do not apply to a person   operating a hang glider.

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   7   CAA of NZ  (b)   Each person operating a hang glider must ensure that the hang glider has a current warrant of fitness issued by a hang gliding   organisation   in   accordance   with   the   procedures authorised by the organisation’s certificate.  106.19   Safety equipment  Each pilot and passenger of a hang glider must wear a—  (1)   serviceable rigid protective helmet conforming to the standards of a hang gliding organisation; and  (2)   a harness of a type conforming to the standards of a hang gliding organisation.  Subpart B — Flight Rules  106.51   Right-of-way rules  (a)   Notwithstanding rule 91.229(b), a pilot of a hang glider soaring on a   ridge, where the ridge is to the right of the hang glider, is not required to turn right when approaching another hang glider head on.  (b)   Notwithstanding rule 91.229(d), a pilot of a hang glider overtaking another hang glider soaring on a ridge must pass on the ridge side of the hang glider being overtaken.  106.53   Clearance below cloud  Notwithstanding rule 91.301(a)(2), a person must not fly a hang glider closer   than 500 feet below cloud up to a maximum altitude of 11 000 feet AMSL in—  (1)   Class G airspace; or  (2)   Class E airspace, except in transponder-mandatory airspace.  106.55   Minimum altitude  Notwithstanding rule 91.311(a)(3), a person may fly a hang glider below a height of 500 feet for ridge soaring, if such flight does not hazard persons or property on the ground.

Civil   Aviation   Rules   Part   106   CAA   Draft Rules  5 April 2025   8   CAA of NZ  106.57   Conditions for flight  A person must not operate a hang glider at night.  106.59   Launch sites  A pilot of a hang glider must only launch the hang glider from a launch site authorised by a hang gliding organisation.  106.61   Cruising levels  The requirements of rules 91.313(a)(1) and 91.239(a) do not apply to a person flying a hang glider.  106.63   Aerobatic flight  The requirements of rule 91.701(b) and (c) do not apply to a person flying a hang glider.  106.65   Callsigns  A pilot of a hang glider must use their pilot identification number for all two-way radio communications with ATS.  106.67   Towing a Hang Glider in flight  A person, other than the pilot of a microlight aircraft, must not tow a hang glider in flight.


